Digital Passband Transmission                                Communication Systems 
 
      ECE DEPT. 
Page1 
UNIT- 4 
DIGITAL PASSBAND TRANSMISSION 
PASS BAND TRANSMISSION MODEL: 
     
Fig: Functional model of pass band transmission model 
 First, the message source emits M symbols on symbol for every 
seconds, denoted by m1, m2,…..mN. These symbols are transmitted with 
equal probability i.e., 
       i i
m p p   
             i all for M
1  
These symbols are given to signal transmission decoder, it produces a 
vector i
S made up of N real elements M N . With Vector i
S as the input, 
modulator then constructs a distinct signal  t Si
 of duration seconds. 
The signal t Si
 is necessarily an energy signal given as 
 M i dt t S E t
i i
,..... 2,1 ,
0
2   
i
S modulates with sinusoidal carrier. The energy signal t Si
 transmits 
over the channel. The channel has following characteristics. 
 Channel is linear, with a sufficient bandwidth to transmit t Si
 
without distortion. 
 The noise added to the channel is AWGN with a process of zero 
mean and power spectral density 20
N 
 
Digital Passband Transmission                                Communication Systems 
 
      ECE DEPT. 
Page2 
The receiver which consist of a detector followed by a signal 
transmission decoder, performs two functions. 
 It reverses the operations performed in the transmitter 
It minimizes the effect of channel noise on the estimate of m^ from 
the transmitted symbol i
m . 
GEOMETRIC REPRESENTATION OF SIGNALS:  
The main idea of geometric representation of signals is to represent any 
set of M signals {si(t)} as a linear combination of N Orthonormal basis 
functions  where N≤M, then the real valued energy signals  s1(t), 
s2(t),…..sM(t) each of duration T seconds , written as ------1 
Where the coefficients of the expression are expressed as -----2 
The real valued basis functions are Orthonormal it means, 
 
In the above eqn first condition state that the basis functions have unit 
energy. The second condition states that the basis functions are ortho normal 
to each other. 
The set of coefficients  { } is naturally viewed as N dimensional 
vector, denoted by si. It has one to one relationship with the transmitted signal 
si(t). 
Where  , 
 
Digital Passband Transmission                                Communication Systems 
 
      ECE DEPT. 
Page3 
 
Given the N elements of the vector Si  operating as input, we use fig(a) 
generating the signal Si(t). It is derived from eqn(1). It consists of N bank 
multipliers, with each multiplier have one basis function followed by 
summer, this scheme is called as synthesizer. 
Given the signal Si(t), i=1, 2, …..M operating as input, we use fig(b) 
generating signal vector. it is derived from eqn(2) It consists of N product 
integrators (or) correlators, with each multiplier have own basis function. 
This scheme is called analyzer.  
 
 
Consider an N dimensional Euclidian space, having M points 
corresponds to signal vector, N mutually perpendicular axes labeled 
. This N dimensional Euclidian space is called  Signal Space. 
 
Digital Passband Transmission                                Communication Systems 
 
      ECE DEPT. 
Page4 
 
Fig : Geo metric representation of signals for N= 2  & M=3 
In N dimensional Euclidian space, we may define length of the vectors, 
Distance between vectors and angles between vector. 
The squared length of any signal vector is defined as the inner product 
or dot product of Si itself 
 
The relation between energy of the signal & representation of vector is 
derived as 
 
                          
For j=k,  
 
Digital Passband Transmission                                Communication Systems 
 
      ECE DEPT. 
Page5 
 
In case of pair of signal si(t) and sk(t), we have 
 
The squared distance between the points represented by the signals si(t) & 
sk(t) is denoted as 
 
The angle between two signal vectors si & sk  is expressed as 
 
The cosine of the angle θik is equal to inner product of these two vectors 
divided by the product of their individual norms. 
GRAM SCHMIDT ORTHOGONALIZATION PROCEDURE: 
 In case of geometric representation of signals, the M energy signals are 
linear combination of N orthonormal basis functions, this one can be verified 
mathematically by using Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization. 
 Let us consider M energy signals S1(t),S2(t)……SM(t). By using S1(t) , 
the first basis function is defined as, 
                                    -------1 
 
Digital Passband Transmission                                Communication Systems 
 
      ECE DEPT. 
Page6 
                                        
By using S2(t) , the coefficient S21 is defined as, 
                             -----3 
We may thus introduce new a new intermediate function,  ------4 
Which is orthogonal to ᶲ1(t),over the interval 0 ≤ t  ≤ T, ᶲ2(t) is defined as --------5 
Substituting eqn (4) in eqn (5), We get -------6 
It is clear that from eqn 5, ------7 
From eqn 6, ------8 
The set of basis functions defined as, 
 
Digital Passband Transmission                                Communication Systems 
 
      ECE DEPT. 
Page7 
 
RESPONSE OF BANK OF CORRELATORS IN NOISE: 
Suppose that the input to the bank of N product integrators or 
correlators is not the transmitted signal Si(t) but actually it is a received signal 
x(t).From the equivalent model of channel it is, 
 
The output of the correlator j, is the sample function of RV xj is, 
 
Consider a new random variable X’(t) whose sample function x’(t) is related 
to the received signal x(t) as follows, 
 
Substitute 1 and 2 eqns in 3, then we get 
 
The sample function x’(t) therefore depends only on the channel noise w(t). 
From 3&4 eqns, 
 
Digital Passband Transmission                                Communication Systems 
 
      ECE DEPT. 
Page8 
 
From the above eqn, w’(t) must be included in the right to preserve the 
equality in eqn 5. 
Note:  
 The signal si(t), i=1, 2, …M is applied to a bank of correlators, with a 
common input and supplied with a suitable set of N orthogonal basis functions, N.  
The resulting output defines the signal vector si.  
 We represent each signal si(t) as a point in the Euclidian space, N ≤ M 
(referred to as transmitted signal point or message point).The set of message points 
corresponding to the set of transmitted signals si(t) {i = 1 to M} is called signal 
constellation. 
 The received signal x(t) is applied to a bank of N correlators and the 
correlator outputs define the observation vector x.   
 On the receiving side the representation of the received signal x(t) is 
complicated by the additive noise w(t).  
 The vector x differs from the vector si by the noise vector w. 
 However only the portion of it which interferes with the detection process is 
of importance to us, and this is fully described by w(t).   
 Based on the observation vector ‘x’ we may represent the received signal 
x(t) by a point in the same Euclidian space used to represent the transmitted signal. 
 
CORRELATION RECEIVER:  
The optimum receiver consists of two sub systems 
i) detector or demodulator 
ii) signal transmission decoder 
 
Digital Passband Transmission                                Communication Systems 
 
      ECE DEPT. 
Page9 
Detector or demodulator is shown in fig a, in consists of N-bank of 
correlators, each one having one orthogonal basis function that are locally 
generated. This bank of correlators operates on received signal x(t) and 
produce the observation vector x.                                        
 
The second part of the receiver is signal transmission decoder, it is 
shown in fig b. It is implemented in the form of maximum likelihood decoder 
that operates on the observation vector x to produce an estimate  of the 
transmitted symbol mi in the way to minimize the avg probability error. 
 
 
Digital Passband Transmission                                Communication Systems 
 
      ECE DEPT. 
Page10 
First the observation vector x are first multiplied by the individual 
signal vectors S1,S2-----SM and the resulting products are successively 
summed by accumulators to produce corresponding set of inner products. 
Next these inner products are subtracted by transmitted signal energies. 
Finally the largest in the resulting set of numbers is selected and takes the 
appropriate decision on the transmitted message. 
The optimum receiver in eqn 1 & 2 is commonly referred to as 
correlation receiver. 
PROBABILITY OF ERROR: 
The average probability of symbol error, Pe is  
 
The above eqn is rewritten interms of likelihood function as follows 
 
 The above equation represents avg probability of error interms of likelihood 
functions for an N dimensional vector. 
DETECTION OF SIGNALS WITH UNKNOWN PHASE:  
 Consider a digital communication system in which the transmitted 
signal equals   
  ()= cos(2 )       0≤ ≤                            −−−−1 
 Where E is the signal energy, T is the duration of the 
signaling interval, and the fi is an integral multiple of 1/2T. When no 
 
Digital Passband Transmission                                Communication Systems 
 
      ECE DEPT. 
Page11 
provision is made to phase synchronize the receiver with transmitter, the 
received signal will, for AWGN channel, be of the form 
()= cos(2 + )  + ()     0≤ ≤                            −−−−2  
Where w(t) is the sample function of a white Gaussian noise process of zero 
mean and power spectral density N0/2. The phase  is unknown, and it is 
usually considered to be the sample value of a random variable uniformly 
distributed between 0 and 2 radians. This implies a complete lack of 
knowledge of the phase. A digital communication system characterized in 
this way is said to be non-coherent.  
From eq. 2, the received signal, the output of the associated correlators in the 
receiver will be a function of unknown phase . From trigonometric identity, 
we may rewrite equation 2 in the expanded form 
()= 2 cos cos(2 )− 2 sin sin(2 )  + ( )     
    0≤ ≤                            −−−−3 
Suppose that the received signal x(t) is applied to a pair of correlators, we 
assume that one correlators is supplied with the reference signal 
√ cos(2 ) and other is supplied with the reference signal √ sin(2 ) 
For the both correlators, the observation interval is  0≤ ≤ . Then in the 
absence of noise we find that the first correlator output equals √ cos and 
second correlator output equals −√  sin . The dependence on the unknown 
phase  may be removed by summing the squares of the two correlator 
outputs, and then taking the square root of the sum. Thus when the noise w(t) 
is zero, the result of these operations is simply √ , which is independent of 
phase . So, for the detection of a sinusoidal signal of arbitrary phase, and 
which is corrupted by an additive white Gaussian noise (which is in eq.2), we 
can use “Quadrature receiver “, this receiver is optimum in the sense that it 
realizes detection of signals with the minimum probability of error.  
 
Digital Passband Transmission                                Communication Systems 
 
      ECE DEPT. 
Page12 
 
Fig: Quadrature receiver 
 
